In summary, the previous section has established the following three stylized
facts:
1. An incumbent receives two distinct kinds of support, one based on the
personal reputation, which is called personal vote, and the other based on
the incumbent’s party’s reputation, which is called party vote.
2. For any incumbent, there is a tradeoff between pursuing personal vote and
party vote.
3. An incumbent cultivates a personal vote by providing more services and
porks to the constituency and representing the aggregate preference of a
constituency.
which implies that institutional arrangements that induce an incumbent to pursue more personal vote than party vote generally improves the incumbent’s
accountability to the constituency. As the previous section’s argument goes,
when parties are taken out of the equation legislative recall in Taiwan seems to
do exactly that by putting the name of the incumbent alone on the ballot for an
up or down vote. These conclusions provide a nice segue to the next question:
would the same prediction hold when parties are put back into the equation
again?
To this question, my answer is a qualified yes. Just like electoral systems,
institutional arrangements of recall around the world are so diverse that it is difficult to argue that parties would always allow incumbents to seek more personal
vote in response to the threat of recall elections. Fortunately, the mechanism
sketched here, though specific to the legislative recall from which the evidence
is drawn, is general enough that it should be applicable to all recall institutions around the world upon minor modification to account for specific details
of institutional arrangements of recall. I posit that before recall is feasible, pol-

1

icymaking making process in Taiwan follows the same pattern and mechanism
of political business cycle that allow the legislative members of the government
party, which is defined here as the party that controls the executive branch of the
government, to avoid electoral punishment for passing extreme policies toward
the beginning of their term. The recall changes the calculus of the government
party, whose members can now be punished early on for such opportunistic timing of policy implementation, causing the government party to introduce less
extreme policies and its members that represent local single-member districts
(SMDs) to cultivate a stronger personal vote, thus enhancing their accountability to their local constituencies.
Political business cycle was intended as a way to explain economic conditions
with political institutions, more specifically the exogenously fixed election dates.
There are several assumptions underlying this mechanism:
1. Voters make their choice at the poll based on the macroeconomic conditions which signals government competence. More specifically, they do so
by voting for government party candidates when unemployment rate is
low and voting for opposition party candidates when unemployment rate
is high.
2. Voters have rather limited memory, consequently they attach greater importance to the macroeconomic condition when the election day is drawing
closer.
3. Incumbents seek reelection.
4. Incumbents can manipulate the economy by increasing the inflation rate
that lowers the unemployment rate in the short run as predicted by the
Philips curve.
5. At the general election, voters decide the composition of both the executive
2

and legislative branch of the government.
6. The dates of general election are exogenously set by the statute and cannot
be altered.
It follows that, come next election day, voters’ memory of the macroeconomic
conditions right after the last election is much weaker than that in the run up
to the next election day. Consequently, voters will reward the government party
for low unemployment rate before the election day even if the unemployment
rate is high after the last election. Then, unable to move the date of general
election, the government party realizes that it can win the next election by
raising the inflation rate to temporarily lower the unemployment rate before the
election day without losing the election after the next for rising unemployment
right after the election day. Hence, the political business cycle becomes the
equilibrium result, as long as the assumption holds.
Much as it offers a simple and compelling mechanism, political business cycle in its original conception has received its fair share of criticism. Some point
out the flaws in the behavioral assumptions of voters and incumbents which
may prevent the emergence of an electoral cyclical pattern in macroeconomic
conditions; Others question whether incumbents are capable effecting changes
in macroeconomic conditions that make such manipulation possible. Still others investigate how changing the institutional arrangements stipulated in the
assumptions may modify the cyclical pattern. These lines of inquiry have contributed to the development of a vast literature where a more nuanced sketch of
a conditional electoral cycle of both policy instruments and economic conditions
has emerged. Given that not all the studies in this literature do not all concern cyclical patterns of macroeconomic indicators, it would be inappropriate
to consider all of them part of the political business cycle literature. However,
for lack of a better term, this literature will hereinafter be referred to as PBC

3

literature where PBC, though usually an abbreviation of political business cycle
or political budget cycle, is meaningless here except as a label.
In the PBC literature two developments are especially noteworthy for this
study. One offshoot of this literature trains its aim on political legislation cycle,
which refers to the cylical pattern of legislative process in general instead of
focusing on one particular type of policy instruments like fiscal policies, bugeting
among other policies. Most work along this line of inquiry focuses on the volume
of legislative activity at different points in time throughout the legislative term.
Another branch of the PBC literature investigates how changes to the timing
of elections yields changes to the cyclical pattern of the policy or economic
outcomes. This study of recall contributes to the these two branches of the PBC
litertature by sketching a theory illustrating that, policies implemented by the
government party in the legislature tend to be more extreme after the election
days and less extrene before the election days under the typical assumptions
that general elections are held on exogenously fixed dates (usually every four
years) and that by threatening to trigger a legislative recall, which is effectively
just another election for the incumbent legislator, in the middle of the legislative
term, voters can incentivize government party legislators to cultivate a stronger
personal vote throughout the legislative term than before where more effort is
exerted when election day draws near.
To begin with, I first sketch a theory of political legislation cycle when
recall is not feasible. This theory preserves most of the fundamental ingredients
would stay in place. That incumbent legislators single-mindedly seek reelection
has been a longstanding assumption in political science and will continued to
be the case here. Voters also continue to retain a recency bias whereby they
discount the utility of incumbents’ past policies attach greater importance to
events closer to the present is also well-established. These assumptions are

4

central to the prediction that voters discount past job performance such that
doing a good job when the election is coming would more than compensate a
mistake committed in the more distant past.
However, this theory will make one crucial change to the conventional assumptions made by many studies in the PBC literature. I propose a different
assumption about voter motivation which stipulates voters electorally reward
the government for a high degree of policy congruence, and punish the government for a low degree of policy congruence. Strangely enough, the issue of policy
congreuence has largely been sidestepped in PBC literature, even though it is
central to the spatial theory of voting. Many studies in the PBC literature avoid
discussing policy congreuence by focusing on one type of policy instrument for
which voter preference is relatively straightforward. Another way to avoid doing
so is to assume that high volume of policymaking activities by itself can improve
the government party’s chances of winning reelection. Such assumptions could
very well become untenable as in the case of the original political business cycle theory which is frequently criticized for ignoring the possibility that one
party prefers low unemployment whereas the other party low inflation, leading
to a competing theory that the poilitical business cycle revolves around partisan changeovers instead of electoral calendar. Therefore, if a theory of cyclical
pattern of policies that revolves around electoral calendar is to remain robust
against heterogeneity or change over time of preferences among the electorate,
policy congruence should be treated as the ultimate goal for voters.
Finally, this theory further assumes additional institutional arrangements
on which this theory will be built. It is assumed that, with or without recall
institution, both the chief executive and the legislators normall serve a fixed term
bookended general elections held on exogenously fixed election day where voters
choose choose both the chief executive and the legislator. Finally, both the

5

chief executive and the legislators are chosen by constituents in single-member
districts (SMDs) under the first-past-the-post electoral system. Naturally, the
chief executive is elected by a jurisdiction-wide SMD and the legislators are
elected by SMDs which are geographically bounded constiuencies that partition
the entire jurisdiction.
Now that all the assumptions about voters and incumbent legislators are in
place, the prediction of the political legislation cycle can be spelled out. As
voters attribute blames and praise of policy outcomes to the government party
which is in charge of implementing them, they electorally reward and punish
government party incumbents based on these policies as well. Given that the
government party is very unlikely to lose safe seats but very likely to lose swing
seats in marginal constituencies, its main goal is to help reelect their members
standing in the marginal constituency elections. Knowing that voters discount
the utility of policy congruence by the amount of time elasped since the bill
was passed, the government party in the legislature can pass extreme policies
early in the legislative term, and dole out moderate policies in the run up to the
next election to win the retain their seats in marginal constituencies needed to
maintain a workable majority for government bills in the legislature. Hence, I
make the first hypothesis that
Hypothesis 0.0: When recall is not feasible, the government bills passed
earlier in the legislative term are on average more extreme than those passed
later in the legislative term, especially the last year of the legislative term.
In the language of spatial theory of voting, Hypotheis 0.0 can also be expressed as thus:
Hypothesis 0.0: When recall becomes feasible, the distances between government bills passed earlier in the legislative term and those passed later in the
legislative term, espeically the last year of the legislative term, in the policy

6

space are on average positive.
Furthermore, since this political legislation cycle theory is predicated on the
government party’s ability to pass extreme policies and its need to win elections
in marginal constituencies in order to maintain a majority for government bills,
such behavior is conditional on the size of the government party size in the
legislature, the number of marginal constituencies represented by the members
of the government party. Strobl, Bäck, Müller (2021), argue that the government
is less likely to pass austerity policy early in the legislative term both when
it does not hold a majority, which gives the party in opposition the power
to forestall it or prevent it altogether and when the government party has a
large majority, which makes it easier to appease voters. Following I make the
analogous hypothesis that
Hypothesis 0.1: When recall is not feasible, closer the size of the government
party is to the minimum-winning majority, the more likely its extreme bills will
be passed early in the legislature term.
One word of caution may be required to note that Hypothesis 0.1 does not
predict that the government party will pass the most extreme policy when it
controls a minimum-winning majority. It simply predicts that the government
party will most likely to opportunistically time their policy implementation
which intends to maximize the distance between policies introduced before and
after the election day, which helps the government party to exploit the recency
bias to the fullest extent.
This political legislation cycle thus far does not bode well for moderate voters. It suggest that, given sufficient amount of time, the government party can
bounce back from any dip in its popularity come election day, by passing policies
that appease voters in the marginal constituencie. Consequently, legislators, especially those belonging to the government party, are effectively unaccountable

7

for their policies passed early in their legislative term.
This is precisely where the recall comes in to enhance legislators’ accountability to their constituents throughout the legislative term. Voters no longer
have to wait until the election day to punish the government party in the legislature for bad policy outcome. Instead, they can do that immediately after
the government party passes extreme bills or, better yet, threaten to punish
the government party if it passes the bills. This time around, the recency bias
works in favor of voters seeking to hold legislators in the middle of their term,
as it results in a voter choice at tge recall election based for most part on the
asssessment of the recent policies. and constitutes a threat the credibility of
which decreases in the legislator’s margin of victory. Consequently, voters in
the marginal constituency are in a better position to demand the government
party to pass bills that are closer to their aggregate preferences by wielding the
threat of recall leading to this first hypothesis about recall’s incentive effect:
Hypothesis 1.0: When recall becomes feasible, the maximum distance between government bills and the preferences of the marginal constituencies will
be lower than that before recall becomes feasible.
In addition, if recall can be triggered at anytime, it no longer makes sense
for the government party to pass extreme policies in the hope that voters can
forgive them for passing moderate policies that are more congruent with their
preferences. Instead, the government party now expects the threat of recall
of its members representing marginal constituencies to materialize very soon if
the extreme policies are to be passed at anytime, which defeats the purpose
of engineering a political legislation cycle in the first place - to pass extreme
policies without losing swing seats. This leads to the following hypothesis about
legislative recall:
Hypothesis 1.1: When recall becomes feasible, the distance between govern-

8

ment bills passed earlier in the legislative term and those passed later in the
legislative term, espeically the last year of the legislative term, in the policy
space decreases.
In addition, since the threat of recall is more credible in marginal constituencies, its effect on the government party’s policies will also be the most pronounced when the government party has the strongest need for marginal seats.
Per the argeuments of Strobl, Bäck, Müller (2021) sketched above, the need for
marginal seats is the strongest when the government has the minimum-winning
majority. As a result, recall’s ability to undermine the political business cycle is
at its strongest when the government has the minimum-winning majority. This
leads to the supplementary hypotheses below:
Hypothesis 1.0.0: When recall is feasible, further than that before recall
becomes feasible. the closer the size of the government party is the minimumwinning majority, the closer the maximum distance between government bills
and the preference of the marginal constituencies will be.
Hypothesis 1.1.0: When recall is feasible, the closer the size of the government party is the minimum-winning majority, the lesser the distance is between
government bills passed earlier in the legislative term and those passed later in
the legislative term, espeically the last year of the legislative term, in the policy
space.
Of course, even if the foregoing hypotheses hold, recall may not completely
eliminate political legislation cycle. Government parties in legislatures around
the world often have to implement unpopular policies for various reasons, and
elections may still be capable of generating a window of opportunities for passing
extreme policies, even when recall is in the picture. Voters’ positive feeling
toward the chief executive ate the beginning of the executive term, which, under
the previously stated assumptions, coincide with the legislative term, may well

9

spill over into the legislative arena, thus allowing the government party in the
legislature to pass some extreme policies in the legislature during that period
without losing many of its government party legislators at recall or general
elections, thus continuing the political legislation cycle. Thus, it is entirely
possible that recall may simply produce a damping effect on political legislation
cycle, without eliminating it.
Suppose the political legislation cycle, would recall generate other incentive
effect that distorts the cycle by encouraging the government party to intentionally pass more extreme policies toward the middle of the term? Naturally,
negotiation within the government party and that between the government party
and the opposition may prevent bill passage to take place as soon as possible,
but that should remain the goal if the government party operates on the assumption that voter has recency bias. Would recall introduce a new ideal timing for
passing extreme policies?
While this question deserves more detailed treatment in the future, my intuition suggests the answer is most likely no. The above argument based on the
existence of honeymoon period, suggests that providing for recall throughout
the legislative term would not prevent the government party from considering
it ideal to implement extreme policies during the honeymoon period at the beginning of the term as soon as possible. Any institutional arrangements that
prevent voters from recalling the incumbents at the beginning of their term
would only reinforce this tendency.
Technically speaking, there is one way recall institutions could cause the
government party to prefer passing extreme policies in the middle of the term.
Suppose voters are forbidden from recalling incumbents during some idiosyncratic time period in the middle of their term, say the second year of a four-year
term, then it may make sense to predict that extreme bills would be more like

10

to be passed in the second year of a four-year term. That sort of institutional
arrangement, though, is difficult to justify and still more difficult to implement.
Even if recall is permissible throughout the legislative term. it still makes sense
to pass extreme policies as soon as possible after the election is over.
Ultimately, the ideal political legislation cycle desired by the government
party should see the passage of extreme policies right after the election day and
the passge of moderate policies right before the election day.
However, while the ideal timing for passing extreme and moderate policies
would most likely remain the same even when recall becomes feasible, the actual
timing for passing extreme policies in the legislature, may actually be distorted
as a result of recall institutional arrangements. Legal prohibition against recalling incumbents, which was discussed above, provides an important way of
distorting the observed political legislation cycle. In the hypothesis about legislative recall the government party has a minimum winning
To understand the effect of recall, it helps to begin by understanding the
policymaking process in Taiwan when recall is in no way feasible through the
perspective of political business cycle. The theory of political business cycle
was first formalized by Nordhaus to explain economic cycles with political institution, more specifically that of fixed-term election. The theory, however, has
been subject to a myriad of criticism from both theoretical and empirical angles. Nevertheless, the fundamental insights that eletions matter to the timing
of policy remains compelling. Details of the mechanisms have been modified,
and focus of studies have shifted from the electoral cycle’s effect on macroeconomic conditions to policy instruments, yielding a more refined and conditional
mechanism of electoral cycle of various policy instruments.
In Taiwan, both the president and the legislators are elected in the same
general election and serve the same fixed term of four years. Hence, the president

11

and the legislature can wor

12

